ammo.js
=======


**Demo: http://syntensity.com/static/ammo.html**

**Example code to give you an idea of the API: https://github.com/kripken/ammo.js/blob/master/examples/webgl_demo/ammo.html#L14**

ammo.js is a direct port of the Bullet physics engine to JavaScript, using Emscripten. The source code is translated directly to JavaScript, without human rewriting, so functionality should be identical to the original Bullet.

'ammo' stands for "Avoided Making My Own js physics engine by compiling bullet from C++" ;)

ammo.js is zlib licensed, just like Bullet.

Discussion takes place on IRC at #emscripten on Mozilla's server (irc.mozilla.org)


Instructions
------------

builds/ammo.js contains a prebuilt version of ammo.js. This is probably what you want.

You can also build ammo.js yourself, as follows:

 * Get Emscripten

      http://emscripten.org

   and set it up. See

      https://github.com/kripken/emscripten/wiki/Getting-started

 * Run the build script,

      python make.py

   which should generate builds/ammo.new.js. Note that this is by default
   an unoptimized safe build which will run very slowly. To generate an optimized
   build (which takes much longer to generate), do

      python make.py fast

 * Optionally, run the automatic tests,

      python test.py


Usage
-----

The most straightforward thing is if you want to write your code in C++, and
run that on the web. If so, then compile your code into LLVM, link it with
bullet, and compile that to JavaScript using emscripten. (The easiest way to
link it is to add your .bc file to the llvm-link command in make.py.)

If, on the other hand, you want to write code in JavaScript, you can use the
autogenerated binding code. A complete example appears in

  examples/hello_world.js

That is HelloWorld.cpp from Bullet, translated to JavaScript. Other examples
in that directory might be useful as well. In particular see the WebGL
demo code in

  examples/webgl_demo/ammo.html


Bindings API
============

ammo.js autogenerates its API from the Bullet source code, so it should
be basically identical. There are however some differences and things
to be aware of:

  * All ammo.js elements should be accessed through Ammo.*. For example,
    Ammo.btVector3, etc., as you can see in the example code.

    Note however that by default ammo.js does *not* wrap builds in a
    closure - Ammo is just another name for |this|. The reason is that
    closure wrapping, while it keeps the global namespace clean, has
    significant performance downsides (currently 50% in the top engines).
    If you must, use a closure, but otherwise it is better not to. Note
    that it is a good idea to run ammo.js in a worker thread anyhow, in
    which case the global namespace is kept clean, and there is
    definitely no need for a closure (however, you must still be careful
    if you compile with the closure compiler, to avoid stepping on the
    minified names it generates).

    Accessing elements in ammo.js through Ammo.* is not strictly
    necessary in a normal (non-wrapped) build, but is recommended since
    it makes it easy to use a wrapped build without changing your code.

    If you do want to wrap a build in a closure, you can use wrap.py
    which is a little tool for that.

    Note that non-wrapped builds can lead to problems if the rest of
    your code uses global variables that collide with ammo.js's! You
    can run your code in JavaScript strict mode to see if that might be
    the problem, it will warn about your functions writing to global
    variables (but it won't notice your actual global variables accessed
    outside of functions). You can also check if this is the problem by
    wrapping an ammo.js build using wrap.py.

  * Member variables of structs and classes can be accessed through
    setter and getter functions, that are prefixed with |get_| or |set_|.
    For example,

      rayCallback.get_m_rayToWorld()

    will get m_rayToWorld from say a ClosestRayResultCallback. Native
    JavaScript getters and setters could give a slightly nicer API here,
    however their performance is potentially problematic.

  * Functions returning or getting float& or btScalar& are converted to
    float. The reason is that float& is basically float* with nicer syntax
    in C++, but from JavaScript you would need to write to the heap every
    time you call such a function, making usage very ugly. With this change,
    you can do |new btVector3(5, 6, 7)| and it will work as expected. If
    you find a case where you need the float& method, please file an issue.

  * Not all classes are exposed, for various reasons. Please file an issue
    if you find that something you need is missing.

  * Each call to |new X()| allocates a new object, sort of like how C++
    |new| works. You need to manually free such objects, which can be done
    in JS using

      destroy(OBJECT)

    |delete| would have been a better parallel to C++, however |delete|
    is a reserved work in JS.

    Note that there is no way to allocate objects other than with |new X()|,
    unlike in C++ where you can define an object and it is held on the stack,
    and free'd automatically. (That might be possible with WeakMaps, but
    not enough browsers support it yet.) So in practice you need to remember
    to |destroy| the objects you create. However, you can let a lot of objects
    leak, in many cases, for example when you are done with using Ammo, there
    is really no need to free all the singleton objects you used. But, if
    you do create a lot of new objects while running Ammo during a long
    session, you should probably free those objects when possible.

    Note that currently destroying a btDiscreteDynamicsWorld fails for some
    reason (but normally you create a singleton of that, so you shouldn't
    really need to destroy it anyhow).

  * Functions that return an entire object, like |btQuaternion someFunc()|,
    will return a reference to a static object held inside the binding
    function. That means that you cannot call the binding function multiple
    times and still use the values - you must copy them.

  * All the bindings functions expect to receive wrapper objects, that
    contain the raw pointer inside them, and not a raw pointer (which is
    just a memory address - an integer). You should normally not need
    to deal with raw pointers, but if you do, the following functions can
    help:

      wrapPointer(ptr, Class)   - Given a raw pointer (an integer), returns a
                                  wrapped object. Note that if you do not pass
                                  Class, it will be assumed to be
                                  |Object| - this is likely not what you want!
      getPointer(object)        - Returns a raw pointer
      castObject(object, Class) - Returns a wrapping of the same pointer but to
                                  another class
      compare(object1, object2) - Compares two objects' pointers

    Note that there is always a *single* wrapped object for a certain pointer.
    This allows you to add data on that object and use it elsewhere, by using
    normal JavaScript syntax (object.attribute = someData etc.). Note that
    this almost means that compare() is not needed - since you can compare two
    objects of the same class, and if they have the same pointer they must be
    the same object - but not quite: The tricky case is where one is a subclass
    of the other, in which case the wrapped objects are different while the
    pointer is the same. So, the correct way to compare two objects is to call
    compare().

  * All the bindings functions that return pointers/references/objects
    will return wrapped pointers. The only potentially confusing case is
    when they are returning a null pointer. In that case, you will get
    NULL (a global singleton with a wrapped pointer of 0) instead of null
    (the JavaScript builtin object) or 0. The reason is that by always
    returning a wrapper, you can always take the output and pass it back
    to another binding function, without that function needing to check
    the type of the argument.

    If you want to pass a null pointer, use that NULL object. The reason is that
    the bindings code is faster if it does not need to check each argument
    for its type and convert them on the fly. In practice this should not be
    an inconvenience, and you shouldn't need to think about it, because
    bindings functions return wrapped objects, so you can just pass those
    back into other bindings functions. In other words, you should normally
    never have to see a raw pointer.

  * There is experimental support for binding operator functions. The following
    might work:

      operator         name in JS
      --------         ----------
          =              op_set
          +              op_add
          -              op_sub
          *              op_mul
          /              op_div
         []              op_get
         ==              op_eq

  * There is experimental support for callbacks from C++ back into JS. See
    tests/wrapping.js 's use of ConcreteContactResultCallback. Basically you
    need to create an object of a particular (concrete, not abstract) class,
    and you can then customize it's vtable, replacing some virtual functions
    with others. Note that we do not have the type signature for functions at
    runtime (we can add it, but it would bloat the library), which means you
    will need to convert types manually, so if a parameter is a pointer or
    a reference to say a btVector3, you should do

      obj = Ammo.wrapPointer(arg, Ammo.btVector3)

    and for your return value, if it is a pointer or a reference, return

      obj.ptr

    Other types (ints, doubles) can be left as-is. Note also that as mentioned
    above this approach only works for concrete classes, not abstract ones.
    That is the purpose of ConcreteContactResultCallback. You can add similar
    things to root.h as needed.


Troubleshooting
===============

  * It's easy to forget to write |new| when creating an object, for
    example

      var vec = Ammo.btVector3(1,2,3); // This is wrong! Need 'new'!

    This can lead to error messages like the following:

      Cannot read property 'a' of undefined
      Cannot read property 'ptr' of undefined

    This is an annoying aspect of JavaScript, sadly.


Reporting Issues
================

If you find a bug in ammo.js and file an issue, please include a script
that reproduces the problem. That way it is easier to debug, and we can
then include that script in our automatic tests.


Release Process
===============

Pushing a new build in builds/ammo.js should be done only after the
following steps:

  * Build a safe build and make sure it passes all automatic tests. Safe
    builds contain a lot of runtime assertions that can catch potential
    bugs (similar to the sort of things valgrind can catch).

  * Build a fast build and make sure it passes all automatic tests.

  * Run closure compiler on that fast build and make sure it passes
    all automatic tests.

  * Make sure that the stress test benchmark did not regress
    compared to the old build.

  * Run the WebGL demo in examples/webgl_demo and make sure it looks
    ok.


TODO
====

  * The HEAP memory space may not be implemented as a flat object in
    all JS engines, especially when we use a lot of memory. Need to
    investigate this.

